It is such a pleasure today –
and great fortune
that here, where William Blake lived,
and He sang those songs
of the greatness of this country,
the future that it has to be,
the dreams He saw,
have now come to shape,
that we are here
to celebrate His anniversary.
Things go beyond words
and you cannot express yourself.
Many people do not understand Him
because He wrote it, according to them,
in abstract language
or in the language
that He understood.
But I am happy
that Sahaja Yogis understand Him so well,
and the prophesies that He made
about England.
People used to ridicule,
ridicule it.
Even today they can't believe
that Jerusalem can be built in England.
They cannot believe
that people who have been all their lives,
for ages together,
thought of nothing but materialism,
can take to spirituality to this extent
that it becomes Jerusalem,
and that the whole world comes
to pay homage to this Holy Land,
that this becomes the Holy Land.
It's a fact, He dreamt, He wished it,
because He knew the value of this land.
This land has been touched
by Christ's feet.
Since long, people knew
about Kundalini.
Even if that is lost,
for history it remains,
and He knew about it,
He spoke about it.
In His lifetime, maybe,
people never understood Him.
They must have thought
that He's really a madman,
or something, a fantasy,
or some sort of a poet
who doesn't understand.
But what He wrote,
every word of it, is the truth.
Such a great soul should live
in Hampstead, itself,
is such a blessing, great blessing.
Such people, even if they write or not,
they leave their mark,
their ascent becomes the milestone
for the people who live there:
the aspirations become different,
their priorities become different.
The change is so subtle;
is to be seen, to be felt,
to be understood.
And very sensitive people only
can be born in such places.
Of course, there could be very bad people
also, to counteract it.
But the sensitivity of the atmosphere
attracts such souls to that place
who are sensitive.
You can see from His poems
that He was absolutely authoritative.
He knew the authority.
He had the authority.
He talked like a man
with complete authority.
He had no doubt here, has no doubts.
He just said,
"This is going to happen".
And, like a great warrior, that He know –
He knew that one has to fight
the negativity,
one has to fight all dark problems.
The Spirit has to fight all the time
the matter.
And that's how He talked, spoke, wrote
as a warrior would do,
because He started the fight
when He was born, hundred years back.
And to Me, He's very great,
because He said all these things;
He prepared the stage for Sahaja Yoga.
Because He wrote all these things,
we can say that this was all said.
Because human beings are such,
unless and until it is said before,
they are not going to listen to it.
They'll ask you,
"What is the reference
for what you are saying?"
You have to give reference
for everything, you see –
whatever is written,
according to them, is scripture,
it is the last word.
Whether the book is published
in any trash list, doesn't matter,
but it's published already.
It's such a great thing He's done,
but He's not done it
for any material gain,
or for any fame,
or anything that is superfluous,
but He's done it for something
that is very eternal.
And that is the awakening
of human beings.
That is their second birth,
that is the knowledge of the Spirit.
These words cannot come
from a man who's a weakling,
who is a doubting fellow,
who doesn't know where he stands,
who's confused, who is a drunkard
or who is an alcoholic,
sort of a gone case
or a madcap, cannot!
And it cannot come
from an egoistical man
who thinks no end of himself,
a man who dominates others,
who believes in robbing
other countries,
going to other countries
and rob them,
and go to another house
not from such people.
It comes from a person who knows
the value, the soil on which he's born,
the spiritual value of that land,
not the material value.
And it's so subtle, so subtle;
every word is so subtle,
that it's like a chant,
it's like a chant.
You are specially blessed because
such a great poet was born
in this country.
And, wherever I go,
in My series of lectures,
at least in one lecture
I always mention Him.
He has gone into great detail,
just like Markandeya,
another great poet in India,
who was born thousands of years back.
But to realize that this country
is the heart of the universe,
and here the Jerusalem is going to be,
nobody could have thought
hundred years back a thing like that.
It's fantastic actually.
Even thirty years back,
nobody could have understood it,
even, I would say, ten years back.
People would have thought
this man is really mad,
to call this as the Holy Land.
It is today the Holy Land,
you can see that.
Because so many people
have got Realization in this country.
And you are the ones
who circulate everything.
It is the heart.
Whatever the English do,
whether right or wrong, it all circulates,
though they don't understand
their responsibility,
because they don't know
it is the heart, heart of the universe!
If you do wrong, all right:
the whole world does that same.
People think, that among all
the Western countries,
you are the wisest,
that's what they think.
I don't know how far you come to!
They believe, "It's English, you see".
Even Arabs.
If you say, "It is English",
they believe you.
How far it is true,
God only knows.
And the values that He cherished,
the dreams that He saw,
and the aspirations He had
were so great,
that one has to know that there must be
something in this land that He aspired,
He was not mad, in any way.
Nowhere, no poet in any country
has written like this.
It was given Him the chance,
the authority to say it.
That means you must circulate.
Circulate with the heart,
that circulates, scatters,
looks after the whole body.
And, once it collapses,
the whole body collapses.
It's not so.
The English heart has to become
the heart of William Blake,
and not the chicken-hearted one,
or the aggressive one,
or the hatred-filled pockets,
or the hateful one.
Because the blood flows through you.
To realize this,
to understand the responsibility
of an Englishman is very, very great.
In the heart resides the Spirit.
Sahaja Yogis know this, that,
till a certain stage,
it resides in the heart.
So, it's a very, very great position
you occupy,
so that you people become aware.
It's important also that you are the cells,
the important cells of the heart.
Heart doesn't think, does it?
It does not think, it loves.
It loves.
When you think, you must know
you are not Englishmen
as described by William Blake.
But if you love, you are.
And love doesn't mean personal love,
or carnal love,
or all kinds of ideas of love
is charity work.
It means the love of the Spirit
which is awakened within you
which just emits love,
which just emits.
It doesn't think, it just emits;
it doesn't think that whether it should
give to the black or the white;
whether it should give it
to the rich or the poor.
It just loves. It flows.
And that is why one should get
Realization in England.
Very important.
Without Realization,
you cannot flow, you cannot give,
you will never understand
the value of giving,
you will never enjoy giving.
You will never know
the beauty of generosity
unless and until you become
the cell of the heart.
You are the cell of the heart.
It's the most important position,
as I told you,
it's the most vital particle
of that heart.
And the one who is the heart
has to be like a lion.
He roared, actually roars,
if you read these things,
like a lion He roars.
He has to be like a lion.
And not to be frightened,
like English language is, 'I'm afraid'.
It starts with 'I'm afraid',
and ends with 'I'm afraid'.
What are you afraid of?
Every person is afraid of you.
You have to change your language.
You have to speak like Him,
Sahaja Yogis have to speak
like William Blake.
The way He spoke
about His great country,
about the soil in which He was born,
about the people
who will be born here,
who will be Sahaja Yogis,
He has described them so well:
that men of God will be born
on this soil –
men of God, special people,
the chosen ones,
not those who have branded themselves
as "chosen".
Most of the "chosen" ones
are going towards the Hell only.
But the really chosen ones
will be born on this soil.
And they will become prophets.
Not only that, but they'll have
a special power to make others prophets.
He saw it.
At that time, He could see
that you all are going to become prophets,
and that you all are going to make
others prophets.
Like one enlightened light
enlightens another.
He could see so clearly.
What a clear heart He must be having!
What a clear vision He must be having,
what a clear brain He must be having
to receive all this information
about today!
So you have to become, it's the point,
you may be God's people,
but you have to become a prophet.
Unless and until you are a prophet,
what's the use of choosing you also,
what's the use of you being born here?
You all have to become prophets.
And, to become a prophet,
Kundalini has to be awakened,
you have to be Realized,
and you get these special powers
to realize others.
People can't believe it that,
in Sahaja Yoga today,
if you get Realization,
you can give Realization to others.
When I went to Rome the people
had these doubts, I felt,
when I said that,
"Next moment you can give
Realization to others".
And they just could not believe it,
that they can feel the Kundalini,
they can give Realization.
It's too much to believe in it,
it's too fantastic.
So, the last day, I said,
"All those who have felt the cool breeze
can stand behind the people
who have not felt the cool breeze".
They are very nice people,
I must say, these people in Rome,
because I think they have reached
the conclusion of complete frustration
with their seeking.
So they stood up
behind each of one of them.
And they were amazed
they could raise the Kundalini;
they could give Realization.
They said, "Mother,
we got Realization only yesterday",
some of them.
I said, "It's all right;
you could have done it yesterday,
but today you are doing it
with rather".
"You could have done it immediately.
But this is what it is,
a fantastic thing".
So there is no place for you
to have any doubts;
don't waste your energy in doubting.
You have done that it's too much.
It's too much.
Now the time has come for you
to get your realization,
to get enlightened,
to understand it.
But there are still people
who are on the fence,
and they are neither this way
nor that way.
And Christ has described them very well.
He said, "I don't mind hot or cold",
mean the people who get
the cool breeze,
of course they are first class.
Even those who get hot are all right,
because they would like
to get rid of their hot.
"But the half-way I don't like.
I'll spit them out of My mouth".
The ones who go three steps forward
and four steps backwards;
such people are really a headache
to Sahaja Yoga, I tell you.
If they get out, it's much better.
Half-hearted people in Sahaja Yoga
are of no use,
which was told by Christ,
long time back,
but I don't know if people
really realize it or not.
And this is the problem I have faced
in this country a bit too much.
The maximum in this country,
to be very frank.
The ego is of a subtle nature,
such a subtle nature, in this country.
Every country has a different type.
Like we can say in Spain,
it is like the bullfighting.
In Rome it is the artist's ego;
they think they are great artists,
you see, they have a sense of beauty.
All, sorts of things.
But, in this country,
you must know what sort of an ego
you people have,
it's thinking that,
'Nobody could be better than us.
We are the topmost people.'
You see, that upper –
what do you call it –
upper lip? Upper stiff?
Stiff upper lip, stiff upper lip.
I mean, they themselves laugh
at themselves – it's a good idea.
But it's true; I have seen that.
That stiff upper lip is the point;
that doesn't make you to smile, laugh –
I mean, even if you certify
that you can smile now, they would not.
That sort of a thing,
this makes you very insensitive.
As if the ego comes down from there
and settles down on the lip.
You cannot, there's no mobility
on the lips, nothing.
"What?"
Such a terrifying face sometimes,
that you don't want to find that.
It takes nothing to smile,
to be congenial.
We are all human beings.
We are not dogs,
that we should bark at each other,
that we should be frowning,
that we should frown at each other.
First thing we have to learn,
that we are the heart cells,
and that we have to love.
Without love, you cannot be called
an Englishman,
according to Mr William Blake.
I won't say anything,
because I don't want to be hanged.
According to Him.
So, first of all, let us know
if we can really love ourselves.
That's the biggest problem.
The first disease,
He did not know perhaps,
William Blake did not know
what I will have to face.
I wish He had written all that.
The first disease the people have here,
apart from the upper lip,
is Left Vishuddhi – means guilt.
They may be Catholic or not,
does not matter.
But they have this built-in guilt
within themselves for nothing at all.
First of all,
you must give up your guilt business.
I think He did not know about it.
William Blake did not know
that people will develop this,
because at that time,
they were not like that.
And this is such a big problem,
which I have been facing,
since I came to this country.
You know, the first four years,
I was struggling with people
who were druggists and chemists.
And the problem they had that,
I said, "Why did you take drugs?"
"What is there to live
in this world for?
For what are we living?"
I said, "For your Spirit".
So they take spirits, you see.
English language has a great advantage,
you see.
You can say it is the Spirit,
in the heart.
You can say the spirit you drink.
Or the spirit –
that is what we call a bhoot
in the Indian language,
means a dead body, dead soul,
a dead person.
So this is the advantage,
and that's how they were indulging
into spirits.
But the problem with them is,
it was such a vicious circle that,
if you tried to correct them,
they would come, recede into themselves,
and get into tantrums.
And say that,
"We are good-for-nothing,
useless people".
All right. Then I would encourage them,
say, "No, no, you are wonderful people,
it doesn't matter. You don't worry".
This, that, every sort of a pamper.
Then they would become ego oriented.
It was impossible.
And the story of people who are always
described in a mathematics' paper,
you see, when they give you –
let's say, seventh standard,
sixth standard –
you get a question like this:
"A house was to be built.
And in that village,
one Mr A came to work,
he did only 1/16 of the work
and he ran away.
And another came in,
who did only 1/50 of the work,
and ran away.
And then the third one came,
who did only the 1/100 of the work
and disappeared.
So when will the work be finished?"
"Never" is the answer.
If you have all runaways
and those who are escapists,
how can the work be finished
with these people who always escape?
Simple answer is 'never'.
You may calculate it,
go on calculating it,
your answer is 'never'.
It's the one.
If you want to escape the situation,
if you want to escape yourself,
if you want to escape the present,
you will never reach there,
where you have to reach.
And you are never going to be satisfied
with yourself;
you are not going to be happy, either.
So you have to face it;
you have to face it, as it is, and stand up.
That's what He said, that,
"You bring the arrow to Me,
I'll face it".
Like a brave man you have to face it,
and not to become, "I'm afraid".
You are not to escape yourself.
You are so beautiful.
Inside, outside, you are very beautiful.
You are the Spirit.
And, if you are the Spirit,
why should you escape yourself?
I just can't understand.
Just face it,
and the Spirit will shine through you.
Just face it with that bravery.
Face it, and you will be amazed
that you are really beautiful.
No doubt about it.
You have to just see,
because you are the cell of the heart.
But it won't be an exaggeration if I say,
that the body, everything,
depends on the heart.
If you fail,
the responsibility will be yours.
It's a very big responsibility,
and a very sweet one.
Because heart doesn't think.
Thinking is madness.
It loves.
It loves and enjoys its love.
It's such a sweet work you have to do.
For that, you start from yourself,
first of all, love yourself,
which is a very difficult thing
for people, to love themselves.
The hatred starts from within.
You hate yourself
and then you start hating everyone.
And it's very common to say,
"I hate you",
second moment, "I love you".
God knows what they mean.
But the main thing is
that they do not love themselves.
If they start loving themselves,
understanding the value of themselves,
if they have the proper esteem,
the self-esteem, within themselves –
it's the time.
The time has come,
which was prophesized.
So, I really pay my all homage,
I should say, if you allow Me,
or, I should say, all my love
to the great son of this country,
William Blake, today.
And, as a homage to Him,
you all should decide within yourself,
that you are not going to be soldiers,
carrying the swords
with the shaky hands,
or you’re not going to be afraid
of the horses on which you have to ride.
You have to decide that
you have to be brave people.
But bravery never means aggression,
it never means aggression.
And that’s why that kind of a bravery
can only come into people
whose Spirits are awakened.
So very happy today, to see these
beautiful happenings that He described,
coming to reality.
I can see that coming down.
So many poets have dreamt
about their country, in every country.
But no-one has dreamt
like William Blake,
where He said positively
that this will be the Jerusalem,
means, the holy land of Jerusalem
will have to come down here.
If the people have
that kind of a heart,
that kind of a throne,
the gods will have to come down.
If you have that kind of a reception,
all the Divine has to go down.
But let us see if we have
that heart or not.
I hope – there are some new people today;
they may not understand many things
that I am saying,
just like as you do not understand
William Blake.
But let Realization work it out,
have patience with yourself.
We have to have patience.
And do not doubt yourselves.
Actually, mostly the doubts
are with yourself, not with Me.
If you have no doubts,
that you are born at a very great times,
you will not doubt Me.
It happened in Rome;
the people in Italy
didn’t doubt Me at all,
not even once.
And they saw Me in dreams,
before I’d reached there.
Imagine! So sensitive!
They said, “We knew, Mother.
We saw your photograph,
we saw in the dream,
we saw your photograph.”
And they told Me how many times
they had dreams.
I mean, wonderful people there,
I should say, though people say
that Italians are horrible people.
But I, somehow or other,
get the cream, I think.
Such wonderful people they were,
and they all got Realization.
In this country, I have struggled
for eight years,
and the number may be the same.
So, this is what it is.
We have to little bit accelerate.
The heart is rather lethargic.
The lethargy has to be overcome,
and has to be done with love.
I’m sure you have had
some introductions before.
And now all the people
who are Sahaja Yogis here,
are so many in this Hampstead,
they have to be really
rejoicing today,
that what William Blake has said
in those days, is seen happening.
Those Sahaja Yogis who are still
not up to mark should also today
take a vow, that they will go all-out
to see that they come up to it.
Thank you very much.
May God bless you all.
Now, if people have any questions, they can ask them,
because there are some new faces I see.
It would be a good idea.
I wish you had translated it in French,
but so many types of people are here,
that I don’t  know how many languages, you will have to translate.
But later on, you can translate the…
I feel pain here, Mother.
Hum? They’re all catching on Right Nabhi.
All right. So it doesn’t matter. That’s all right, that goes a long way.
People are from Portugal here also, what language should we speak, isn’t it?
In this lifetime only I have learnt English, and that too, not so well.
But I can manage.
If you have any questions, you can ask Me.
We’ve got five minutes, and then we can have the Realization.
You can all put your hands towards Me, like this.
And I’m sorry, you have to take out your socks, your shoes.
Because of the cold weather, maybe, you can’t, you don’t have any proper things here.
Just put your hands still towards Me, just like that.
Now, the first thing is, that you all are going to get your Realization.
Not to get frustrated with yourself, in no way,
and you are not to do anything, just keep quiet, close your eyes,
and put your hands towards Me.
That’s all. Simple as that.
You are not to do anything. No effort is needed, at all.
Just leave it, and it will work out, I’m sure it will. So don’t worry about it.
Please keep your eyes shut.
That’s important. Because, when the Kundalini rises about this Agnya Chakra,
it dilates the pupil before it pierces through.
So, it’s better that you keep your eyes shut. It will help you.
Got it, most of them.
You will feel a cool breeze in your hand.
Now, there’s no autosuggestion, or anything: if you don’t feel it, you don’t feel it.
Or if you feel it, it is there.
That is the breeze of the Holy Ghost.
You can ask the question, "Is this the breeze of the Holy Ghost?", and you’ll get it.
Cool wind of the Holy Ghost in this cold weather.
Are you feeling? Close your eyes, it’s better, because it’s very subtle,
it’s a subtle thing, and we live on a gross plan.
So it’s a subtle thing.
Best is to keep your eyes shut, so that you can feel it better,
and pay attention to your fingertips, where you’ll feel it.
Stretch the hands a little bit.
Stretch them a little bit, not much, but be comfortable.
You may ask a question, in your heart,
"Whatever Mother is saying about William Blake, is it true?"
That’s a simple question you can ask.
Put the fingers towards Me, and don’t push them towards yourself.
Towards Me, straight. Stretch your fingers.
Just ask the question, simple question.
Now put your right hand on your heart, and ask the question,
"Mother, am I the Spirit?" Ask inside; ask three times.
Please ask three times, "Mother, am I the Spirit?"
Now put the same hand down below, on the stomach,  on the left side, and say,
"Mother, am I my own Guru? Am I my own Master?"
Ask the question.
Now put the hand much higher, towards the neck,
on the left side, and say,
"Mother, I’m not guilty". Say it thrice.
Say it thrice, please, all of you, "Mother, I’m not guilty at all".
Now, put your hand on your head, on the fontanel bone area.
And now say, "Mother, please, give me my Realization".
Because it is your freedom to ask for it.
If you don’t ask for it, I cannot force on you.
I cannot force. Your freedom is to be respected.
Just say, "Mother, please, give me my Realization".
On top of your head, here,
on the fontanel bone area, where the children have a very, very soft bone.
Just ask, "Mother, please give me my Self-Realization"
It’s your own, but you have to ask; nobody can force it on you.
Say it thrice.
Now, lift your hand up there, and see if there’s a cool breeze coming or a hot.
Maybe some people who are new might get hot, a little bit.
Now, put both the hands towards Me, and see if the cool breeze is coming or not,
even the new people. Keep your eyes shut.
Hum, it’s working out.
Don’t think about it; don’t think.
By thinking you are not going to get it.
Very good. I think they’ve got it.
Liver
All right Gavin?
Vishuddhi.
Don’t feel guilty, please don’t – at first I said that you are not to feel guilty.
Now you better say it eight times.
Ah, better.
All right, are you feeling the cool breeze? Good, enjoy yourself.
Are you? Are you feeling the cool breeze in the hand? Good.
Those who are feeling the cool breeze
can open their eyes, slowly, but do not think.
You can watch Me without thinking.
Otherwise, better is to keep them closed.
If you can slowly open them.
But just watch Me without thinking.
Hum. It’s still there.
See your liver.
Some of you may not be feeling on the hand,
but can be feeling on the head.
Some of you just feel it on the head maybe.
Because if you smoke, or something is wrong.
Hum.
You’re all right? It’s going out.
Gregoire, put her left hand on her liver.
Is she all right? Left, right hand on the liver- left hand on the liver here.
Those new people who are not feeling the cool breeze,
raise your hands, please.
Hum. Now.
Now you might be feeling on your head, just see if you are not feeling. [Unclear]
This lady, here.
Don’t get upset, these are the people who are Realized,
as described, they are the prophets.
And they have the power to make others prophets
and you will also have the same powers.
Next moment.